      TIME TO COSMETIC DETERIORATION OF BREAST CANCER PATIENTS

This is a data set from a retrospective study carried out to compare
the cosmetic effects of radiotherapy alone versus radiotherapy and
adjuvant chemotherapy on women with early breast cancer.  The use of
excision biopsy followed by radiation therapy has been suggested as
an alternative to mastectomy.  This therapy preserves the breast and
hence has the benefit of an improved cosmetic effect.  The use of
adjuvant chemotherapy is indicated to prevent reoccurrence of the
cancer, but there is some clinical evidence that it enhances the
effects of radiation on normal tissue thus offsetting the cosmetic
benefit of this procedure.

To compare the two treatment regimes a retrospective study of 46
radiation only and 48 radiation plus chemotherapy patients was made.
Patients were observed initially every 4--6 months but as their
recovery progressed the interval between visits lengthen.  At each
visit the clinician recorded a measure of breast retraction on a
three point scale (none, moderate, severe).  The event of interest
was the time to first appearance of moderate or severe breast
retraction.  Due to the fact that patients were only observed at
these random times the exact time of breast retraction is known only
to fall in the interval between visits.

The data consists of the interval, in months, in which deterioration
occurred (interval censored observations) or the last time a patient
was seen without having deterioration occurred as yet (right
censored observations).


REFERENCES

Beadle, G., Come, S., Henderson, C., Silver, B., and Hellman, S.
(1984).  The effect of adjuvant chemotherapy on the cosmetic results
after primary radiation treatment for early stage breast cancer.
International Journal of Radiation Oncology, Biology and Physics,
10, 2131--2137.

Beadle, G., Harris, J., Silver, B., Botnick, L, and Hellman, S (1984).
Cosmetic results following primary radiation therapy for early
breast cancer.  Cancer, 54, 2911--2918.


This data set is also studied in the book "Survival Analysis" by J.
Klein and M. Moeschberger (1997 Springer New York).  See Section 5.2
of the book.
